# Prognosis-of-mobile-colistin-resistance-pathogen-in-E.-Coli-isolates

## Importance:
The emergence and dissemination of colistin-resistant bacteria-harboring mobile colistin resistance genes pose a threat for treating infections caused by multi-drug resistance bacteria.[1] Colistin is a "highest priority critically important antimicrobial for human medicine" [2], as it is often one of the only therapies available for treating severe bacterial infections.[3]

## Objective:
This study aims to find patterns around the presence of Mobile Colistin Resistance (mcr) gene in Escherichia Coli (E.Coli) isolates to aid colistin prescription strategies.

## Method:
We obtain genomic sequences of E.coli pathogen isolates from the NCBI Pathogen Detection System. We exclude any isolates with missing gene sequences from further analyses. Each gene (or allele) are referenced to their corresponding gene families using the NCBI gene catalog. We create a final database for the study, including the isolate ID, creation date, and unique gene families flagged for their presence or absence in the isolate.

To find the gene families highly associated with mcr, we mine association rules of the form S=>{mcr}. We use a minimum threshold for Support (0.00005)  and Lift (1). Even though when S=>{mcr} is a candidate rule, then so is T=>{mcr}, for each T subset of S. The analysis is however, restricted to only those full sets S recorded to have co-occurred at least once with mcr allowing for computationally efficient mining of candidate rules associated with only mcr.

A logistic regression model is derived to predict the presence or absence of mcr from all other gene families. Because the number of isolates with mcr in the dataset is less (1,700) than the number of isolates without mcr (101,374), penalties for misclassification are used. The penalty for misclassifying the presence of mcr is set to two, and the penalty for misclassifying the absence of mcr is set to one. Precision-Recall curve is used for model evaluation because ROC curves under-performs on imbalanced regression. Odds-ratios of the predictors (gene families except for mcr) are used to interpret each predictor's effect on the presence or absence of mcr. A classification threshold of 0.37 is used, and the maximum number of iterations is set to 100,000. The model is both trained and tested on the training data.

A new dataset is created with the acquisition of mcr gene as the event of interest for survival analysis. Since the testing for mcr started at the later stages of isolate collection, any isolates created before the first record of mcr are removed. Days between the start date and the mcr date acquisition are calculated and used as the time-to-event metric. Survival analysis is performed to understand the risk of acquiring mcr in isolates with tet(A) and isolates without tet(A). Survival plots of Kaplan-Meier estimate are plotted for two groups and a Cox Proportional Hazards model is built with the presence or absence of tet(A) gene as the covariate.

## Results:
155 genomic sequences having the minimum threshold for Support and Lift were found to be associated with mcr. All the candidate rules are listed in the Python notebook, sorted by descending order of Lift andSupport. The antecedent in the table indicates the sequences associated with the consequent (mcr). Higher the Lift and Support for the rule implies a stronger association between that sequence and mcr.

The confusion matrix below shows the numbers of predicted and true values for classes mcr-present and mcr-absent. 1,013 isolates were correctly classified as mcr-present, 690 isolates were wrongly classified as mcr-absent. Precision and Recall of the model were 0.598 and 0.595, respectively. The odds ratio indicates how important a gene family is in predicting mcr and is listed in descending order in a table in the Python notebook. For example, gene-aac(6')-IIc has the biggest odds (10.861868), which implies, an isolate with aac(6')-IIc gene is 10.861868 times more likely to have an mcr gene than an isolate without aac(6')-IIc.

The survival plots of Kaplan-Meier estimates stratified on tet(A) gene is shown below on the left. From the plot, it is evident that the two groups (isolates with tet(A) and isolates without tet(A)) have different survival probabilities. At time 0, both groups seem to have a survival probability of around 1 (100%).As time progresses, the survival probability for groups with tet(A) decreases; hence isolates with tet(A) genes are more likely to acquire mcr with time. Survival plots from the Cox PH model for the two groups are shown below on the right. Wald's statistics of 28.23 (p<0.005) shows that the two groups are statistically different. The CoxPH model's coefficients allow us to compute survival risks at each isolate-level given the predictors at any time in the study. Since the covariate used here is only tet(A), the isolates' survival risk entirely depends on the presence or absence of tet(A) gene. The survival for the isolates with tet(A) at one year and five years are 0.97 and 0.89, respectively whereas, one year and five-year survival for isolates without tet(A) are 0.99 and 0.98, respectively. This shows that the risk for an isolate with tet(A) acquiring mcr increases significantly with time compared to isolates without mcr.

## Conclusion and Relevance:
The associations, patterns, and survival hazards derived in this study determine whether an isolate should be prescribed colistin or not, depending on its genomic sequences and creation time. 

The association candidate rules indicate how often the corresponding sequences occur with mcr in an isolate. In other words, if an isolate contains the entire sequence of the antecedent in the candidate rule, then there is a good chance that the isolate develops mcr. These rules are derived for only gene sequences that have co-occurred with mcr at least once; this does not allow us to model the effects of other gene families on the presence of mcr. To mitigate this, the odds-ratios for all gene families from logistic regression can be used. Isolates containing the highly associated gene families or gene families with large odds-ratio are susceptible to developing mcr and colistin administration must be avoided in such isolates. 

The CoxPH model's coefficients are used to find the probability of an isolate developing mcr at different times, stratified on the presence of tet(A). Colistin can be prescribed to both groups at the beginning but. As time progresses, the group with tet(A) gene becomes more susceptible to developing mcr, and the prescription of colistin should be avoided for that group.
